Hydra 1.1 blog post (#1657)
facebookresearch/hydra: website/blog/2021-06-13-Hydra_1.1.md

---
title: Hydra 1.1
author: Omry Yadan
author_title: Creator of Hydra
author_url: https://github.com/omry

> author_image_url: https://graph.facebook.com/733244046/picture/?height=200&width=200

Reviewer: I can't see your face -- not sure if intended :)

Author: Yeah, this no longer works.
Not sure if there is an easy way to get the Facebook profile picture.

Reviewer: No idea => maybe you can put it on your personal Dropbox or Google drive? (unsure if that'd work though).
Feel free to resolve otherwise.

Author: I posted a question in the internal graph API group, let's see if they have a solution.
If they do we can fix this retroactively.

tags: [Hydra, Release]
image: https://hydra.cc/img/Hydra-Readme-logo2.svg
---

<p align="center"><img src="/img/Hydra-Readme-logo2.svg" alt="logo" width="70%" /></p>

> After a After many months and a lot of hard work by many people, Hydra 1.1 is finally out!  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After many months and a lot of hard work by many people, Hydra 1.1 is finally out!  
```

> Hydra 1.1 comes with OmegaConf 2.1, which has it's own share of awesome new features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hydra 1.1 comes with OmegaConf 2.1, which has its own share of awesome new features.
```

<!--truncate-->

> This blog post highlights some of the most prominent changes, check the release notes to learn more:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This blog post highlights some of the most prominent features, check the release notes for a complete list of changes:
```

- OmegaConf 2.1 [release notes](https://github.com/omry/omegaconf/releases/tag/v2.1.0)

### Major new features in Hydra 1.1
- More powerful config composition
  - Every config can now have a Defaults List
  - Composition order of current config can be controlled via the `_self_` keyword in the Defaults List
  - Support for composing multiple configs from the same config group
  - Support for configuring the config search path from the primary config
- Recursive instantiation
- Experimental callbacks support
- OmegaConf 2.1:
  - Relative interpolations
  - New OmegaConf interpolation grammar supporting nested interpolations and much more
  - More powerful custom resolvers

### More powerful config composition
Config composition is the key area of improvement in Hydra 1.1.  
The biggest change is support for a Defaults List in any config, and not just the primary config.

This enables many new capabilities:
- Any config can now "extend" other configs. This enables config files to be associated with a Structured Config schema and to extend other config files
- A top level "experiment config" can now override the Defaults List as well as config values

> - Complex frameworks can now have their own Defaults List, reducing boilerplate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Complex frameworks can now have their own Defaults List, reducing boilerplate in dependent use cases
```

Author: I think I prefer the original version.

> Other related changes includes the ability to change the order a config is composed relative to config in its Defaults List by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other related changes include the ability to change the order a config is composed relative to config in its Defaults List by 
```

> Other related changes includes the ability to change the order a config is composed relative to config in its Defaults List by 
> adding `_self_` to the Defaults List and the ability to use multiple configs from the same config group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other related changes includes: 1)  Changing the order of how a config is composed relative to its Defaults List with the keyword `_self_` 2) Using multiple configs from the same config group.
```

Author: You have a double space after `1)`

Reviewer: Just a note that I also found this sentence hard to understand, due to being very long without punctuation. @jieru-hu's version is more readable.

Learn more:
- [The Defaults List](/docs/next/advanced/defaults_list)
- [Extending configs](/docs/next/patterns/extending_configs)
- [Structured Configs Schema](/docs/next/tutorials/structured_config/schema)
- [Configuring Experiments](/docs/next/patterns/configuring_experiments)

> - [Select multiple configs from config group](/docs/next/patterns/select_multiple_configs_from_config_group)

Reviewer 3: I tried adding an `.md` extension to these like in PR #1649, but yarn couldn't resolve the links.
I think it doesn't matter though because these links are absolute, so the relative link bug #1640 won't be a problem.

Author: Yeah, the blog is outside of the versioned tree so it behaves differently. I was not able to link to md files.

### Object instantiation enhancements

> `hydra.utils.instantiate()` now instantiate nested objects recursively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`hydra.utils.instantiate()` now instantiates nested objects recursively.
```

> Other enhancements includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other enhancements include:
```

- Support for positional arguments via the `_args_` config key

> - Support to parameter conversion strategy was added via the `_convert_` config key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support for parameter conversion strategy was added via the `_convert_` config key
```
(I'm also not sure about "strategy" here -- why not just "Support for parameter conversion"?)

Learn more [here](/docs/next/advanced/instantiate_objects/overview).

### Hydra callbacks
A new experimental mechanism for user defined callbacks was added.

> Callbacks enables user code to be executed automatically at various points in the lifecycle of your application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Callbacks enable user code to be executed automatically at various points in the lifecycle of your application. 
```

> There are many potential use cases for this, for example automatic registration with your 
> favorite experiment tracking service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are many potential use cases for this, for example automatic registration with your 
favorite experiment-tracking service.
```

Learn more [here](/docs/next/experimental/callbacks).

### OmegaConf 2.1 highlights
OmegaConf 2.1 includes many enhancements, bug fixes, and performance improvements.

#### Relative interpolations
Relative interpolations enable accessing a config node relative to the node defining the interpolation:
```yaml
x: 10
b:
  y: 20
  a: {x}    # 10, absolute interpolation
  d: ${.y}  # 20, relative interpolation
  e: ${..x} # 10, relative interpolation
```

#### Nested interpolations
OmegaConf 2.1 adds a new interpolation grammar supporting more sophisticated usage of interpolations.  

> In the following example, the default value to use if the environment variable `DB_USER` does not exist is defines in the `default_user` config node:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the default value to use if the environment variable `DB_USER` does not exist is defined in the `default_user` config node:  
```

```yaml
default_user: root
db_user: ${oc.env:DB_USER,${default_user}}
```

> ### More powerful custom resolvers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### More powerful custom resolvers
```

OmegaConf custom resolvers can now access parent config node or the config root by defining
keyword parameters named `_parent_` and `_root_`.

In the example below, we use `_parent_` to implement a sum function that defaults to 0 if the node does not exist:

```python
def sum(a, b, *, _parent_):
  return _parent_.get(a, 0) + _parent_.get(b, 0)

> OmegaConf.register_new_resolver("sum", sum, use_cache=False)

Reviewer: Not sure it is useful to show `use_cache` if we use its default value?
```suggestion
OmegaConf.register_new_resolver("sum", sum)
```

Author: Yes. This example was copied from the docs. I fixed the docs after seeing it but left this (duh).
https://github.com/omry/omegaconf/commit/d9d30fa87937a99a53a03a5730c13feb4955265f.

cfg = OmegaConf.create({
  "node": {
    "a": 1,
    "b": 2,
    "a_plus_b": "${sum:a,b}",
    "a_plus_z": "${sum:a,z}",
  },

> })

Reviewer 2: is it possible to include `_root_` in the example as well? 
Also there's no example of `_root_` in omegaconf's doc, could we add it?

Author: It's not important enough for an example.

print(cfg.node.a_plus_b)  # 3
print(cfg.node.a_plus_z)  # 1
```

> ### Other notable improvements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Other notable improvements
```

Author: No, this is at the correct level.

Reviewer 2: this reads more like other notable improvements for OmegaConf 2.1 - is this meant for both Hydra 1.1 and 2.1?

> - Config composition, especially for large configs - is significantly faster. 
> - `OmegaConf.resolve(cfg)` can be used for in-place interpolation resolution on a config object
> - Improved compatibility of OmegaConf config objects with plain dict and list.
> - Support for bracketed style (`foo.bar` is equivalent to `foo[bar]`), this covers interpolations and `OmegaConf.{update, select}` usage.
> - PyDev.Debugger integration for easier debugging of config objects in PyCharm and VSCode

Reviewer: Most bullet points don't end with dots in this post, so for consistency:
```suggestion
- Config composition, especially for large configs - is significantly faster.
- `OmegaConf.resolve(cfg)` can be used for in-place interpolation resolution on a config object
- Improved compatibility of OmegaConf config objects with plain dict and list
- Support for bracketed style (`foo.bar` is equivalent to `foo[bar]`), this covers interpolations and `OmegaConf.{update, select}` usage
- PyDev.Debugger integration for easier debugging of config objects in PyCharm and VSCode
```

### Migrating from 1.0
Hydra 1.1 is a major release. For most people, migrating from 1.0 to 1.1 will be smooth.
However, there are some breaking changes listed in the release notes of OmegaConf 2.1 and Hydra 1.1.

> Most changes comes with a deprecation warning pointing to a specific migration guide page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most changes come with a deprecation warning pointing to a specific migration guide page.
```

> If you see a change in behavior that is not mentioned in the release notes feel free reach out for help.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please feel free to reach out for help if you see a change in behavior that is not mentioned in the release notes.
```

> Please feel free to reach out for help if you see a change in behavior that is not mentioned in the release notes.

Reviewer: Maybe clarify how to "reach out for help"? (is there a place in the doc we can point out to that lists the various ways to ask for help?)

Author: Good idea.
